 
EPICS 7 PROVIDES MAJOR ENHANCEMENTS TO THE EPICS TOOLKIT  
L.R. Dalesio, M.A. Davidsaver, M.R. Kraimer, Osprey DCS LLC, Ocean City, USA 
S.M. Hartman, K.-U. Kasemir, ORNL, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, USA 
A.N. Johnson, G. Shen, ANL, Argonne, Illinois, USA 
H. Junkes, FHI, Berlin, Germany 
 T. Korhonen, ESS, Lund, Sweden  
R. Lange, ITER Organization, St. Paul lez Durance, France 
K. Shroff, BNL, Upton, Long Island, New York, USA 
 
Abstract 
The release of EPICS 7 marks a major enhancement to 
the EPICS [1] toolkit. EPICS 7 combines the proven 
functionality, reliability and capability of EPICS V3 with 
the powerful EPICS V4[2] extensions enabling high-
performance network transfers of structured data. The 
code bases have been merged and reorganized. EPICS 7 
provides a new platform for control system development, 
suitable for data acquisition and high-level services. This 
paper presents the current state of the EPICS 7 release, 
including the pvAccess network protocol, normative data 
types, and language bindings, along with descriptions of 
new client and service applications.   
INTRODUCTION 
EPICS 7 provides support for Data Acquisition, 
Experiment Control, and Data Analysis with new data 
representation and mechanisms in the protocol and data 
representation while preserving the robust, high 
performance, and easily extendible capabilities that are 
expected a control system. EPICS 7 is the merge of 
EPICS 3 and EPICS 4. The release includes both 
communication mechanisms running seamlessly, side by 
side. The new capabilities are provided by the EPICS 4 
communication improvements in pvAccess and pvData, 
the next generation communication protocol and data 
representation. The new protocol provides structured data 
support and a remote procedure call (RPC) . that support 
the integration of all data into microservices: including 
real time data from I/O Controllers (IOCs), processed data 
from data aggregation, and configuration data required for 
plant integration. The most significant improvement is 
that pvData provides the ability to define arbitrary data 
structures for more complex data sets and pvAccess is 
designed to transport those structures in the most efficient 
manner. The new EPICS 7 release enables the 
development of services on all real time, configuration, 
and aggregated data. 
NO CHANGES REQUIRED TO USE  
EPICS 7 
All the features of EPICS V3 work as is. The IOC 
process database, device support and drivers are used by 
both pvAccess/pvData and Channel Access/DBRTypes 
[3] seamlessly. Control System Studio (CS Studio) [4][5] , 
Archive Appliance, run both pvAccess and Channel 
Access protocols. The IOC severs all data over both 
pvAccess and Channel Access. The pvAccess services 
provides the improved metadata for multidimensional 
arrays. All IOC data provides better support for time 
stamps and alarm information.  
NEW FEATURES OF EPICS 7 
The new capabilities overcome limitations of EPICS 
V3 that give EPICS users the ability to develop 
applications that can provide data through a network 
service and access data from any service on the control 
network. The communication mechanisms are provided to 
support a service oriented architecture for real time data , 
aggregation data, and configuration database backends. In 
conjunction with EPICS 7, services are available for real 
time data from the IOC and areaDetector, configuration 
data from a Directory Service and save set service 
(MASAR), and aggregated data from the Data Index 
Service. Complex control is supported with the new 
ability to communicate with devices (groups of PVs on an 
IOC) in an always-consistent, transaction type way. The 
new capabilities extend the scope of EPICS V3 from 
instrumentation and control (I&C) to data acquisition, 
image processing, data analysis, configuration 
management, data management and beyond. 
STRUCTURED DATA 
EPICS 7 can do everything EPICS V3 can do but 
better.  It can construct pvData structures used in EPICS 
V3 as DBR types. For example , the equivalent of a 
DBR_TIME_DOUBLE would be the NTScalar structure 
in Figure 1. The improvements include:  
Figure 1: pvData equivalent of DBR_TIME_double. 
16th Int. Conf. on Accelerator and Large Experimental Control Systems ICALEPCS2017, Barcelona, Spain JACoW Publishing
ISBN: 978-3-95450-193-9 doi:10.18429/JACoW-ICALEPCS2017-MOBPL01
MOBPL01
22
 Content from this work may be used under the terms of the CC BY 3.0 licence ( © 2017). Any distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s), title of the work, publisher, and DOI.
Software Technology Evolution

 
A user tag that could be used for pulse ID and a string 
message on the alarm state. The data representation and 
transportation work together to only send those parts of 
the structure that have changed. In Figure 2, the fields that 
have changed are in bold, and are all that is sent. 
 
Figure 2: pvAccess send only changed fields. 
 
The RPC type services can use structures that are 
different for every call and different for put (request) and 
get (response). The pvData representation can encode 
complex data types like the table pictured in Figure 3.   
  
Figure 3: A pvData representation of NTTable. 
 
These new mechanisms enable developers to create 
Representational State Transfer (REST) style services. 
STATUS OF EPICS 7 
The Build System of EPICS 7, builds both EPICS 3 and 
pvAccess into the single EPICS 7 release. Both pvAccess 
and pvData run alongside of Channel Access and 
DBR_types, either can be used. New Normative Types 
(NT) are used to represent commonly used data structures 
to support the development of client applications. Some 
of the new NTypes include: Tables, N-Dimensional 
Arrays, Heterogeneous Arrays, and Statistical Samples. 
Services pvAccess provides improved metadata for the 
IOC Database. There are REST style services over 
pvAccess that connection to Relational DB and No SQL 
Database Services. There is a Gateway Alpha Release that 
demonstrates the ability to pass all Version 3 types as 
well as area detector data, Field Programmable Gate 
Array (FPGA) buffers, and tables through a share d 
connection into the control network, limiting the impact 
of clients connected outside of the control network. The 
new network and data representation layers can replace 
and in most cases, improve existing functionality with one 
exception, pvAccess Database Links. This is expected to 
be complete in (2018 Q2). An Access Security plugin is 
defined, but there is not an implementation in use now . 
New data aggregation libraries for the pvAccess library 
are designed and planned for Java Client API in (2018 
Q2). 
Data Aggregation is planned for the C++ Client AP but 
is not yet scheduled. The new capabilities provided in 
EPICS 7 enable the development of services for complex 
monitoring and control applications in the current release. 
SERVICES 
In EPICS V3, the primary service was the IOC. No 
other dynamic service is in widespread use in the EPICS 
collaboration. EPICS 7 provides the ability to develop 
services for real time, aggregated, or configuration data. 
The IOC service works the same as always for all scalar 
values and their metadata. The new connection to the IOC 
database, QSRV, adds the axis information to the 
metadata for vector values, such as the value field of the 
Waveform Record. The data acquisition and image 
manipulation library, areaDetector, [6] now has a 
pvAccess plugin that serves area detector images and has 
been demonstrated to run through areaDetector, pvAccess 
server and client, to the CSS viewer. An Image size 
(1692*1352) at 33 Hz. [7] Figure 4 shows the image on 
the left through pvAccess and the image on the right 
through pvAccess.  
 
Figure 4: CSS display an image from V3 and pvAccess. 
 
The server for pvAccess requires much less CPU time 
than Channel Access to serve the images of this size and 
this rate as it makes use of smart pointers throughout the 
pipeline. It also requires less CPU to display the images at 
this rate as the NTNDArray is very like the Vimage. The 
CPU load for these is shown in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5: Server and CSS CPU usage. 
 
The first pvAccess REST style service is the Directory 
Service. This service collects record name and property 
information and provides the data as a NTTable. 
16th Int. Conf. on Accelerator and Large Experimental Control Systems ICALEPCS2017, Barcelona, Spain JACoW Publishing
ISBN: 978-3-95450-193-9 doi:10.18429/JACoW-ICALEPCS2017-MOBPL01
Software Technology Evolution
MOBPL01
23
Content from this work may be used under the terms of the CC BY 3.0 licence ( © 2017). Any distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s), title of the work, publisher, and DOI.

 
 
 
Figure 6: PV properties from ChannelFinder in CSS. 
 
The data also includes runtime parameters such as IP 
address and connection stat us as shown in Figure 6. This 
service is used by physics application to map EPICS 
Process Variables (PVs) to physics device names. The 
physics view of the physics devices relates to how 
elements affect the beam at certain location in the beam 
transport. This was captured in a relationship view by 
Lingyun Yang at NSLS II and is shown in figure 7. 
 
 
Figure 7: Corrector properties labelled on the left. 
 
There are typically over 1 million PVs in a user facility 
such as NSLS II. As this is a service, CSS can also use the 
same query to access the correctors and display their 
value and readback to display them in a table widget. It 
can also be used to display all beam position monitors’ x 
and y position as a table or an orbit as shown in Figures 8 
and 9. 
 
Figure 8: CSS uses directory service. 
 
 
Figures 9:  CSS uses directory service. 
Any application can use this set of properties to create 
an ordered view with the order of the properties, such as 
geography or device, along with the value of a property 
such as the physical position along a trajectory such as the 
z axis of an accelerator beamline. CSS has a tool that 
allows users to create the hierarchical view using the tags 
and features in the Directory Service as shown in figure 
10. The Directory Service has proven very versatile and 
useful in many other applications. Many of the physics 
applications that were developed by Dr. Yang at NSLS II, 
used this service and others as reported at the ICLAPECS 
2013 [8]. 
Figure 10:  CSS orders properties in directory service. 
  
Figure 11:  MASAR Uses Save Set Service   
In addition to the Directory Service, the Save Set 
Service and Data Index Service have been developed to 
support physics applications. The Save Set Service 
manages snapshots of setpoints. The MASAR 
applications (one shown in Figure 11) use the Directory 
Service to build up Save Set configurations. They use the 
Save Set Service to store, retrieve, and annotate sets of 
data that are stored there. MASAR was one of the primary 
16th Int. Conf. on Accelerator and Large Experimental Control Systems ICALEPCS2017, Barcelona, Spain JACoW Publishing
ISBN: 978-3-95450-193-9 doi:10.18429/JACoW-ICALEPCS2017-MOBPL01
MOBPL01
24
 Content from this work may be used under the terms of the CC BY 3.0 licence ( © 2017). Any distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s), title of the work, publisher, and DOI.
Software Technology Evolution

 
tools used for machine commissioning at NSLS II with 
over 1200 sets of setpoints stored as shown in Figure 12. 
 
 
Figure 12: MASAR (Save/Restore) Use at NSLS II. 
 
The Data Index Service, stores properties such as 
configuration data, user, comments, along with 
independent variables that are taken in real-time, that are 
used to locate a data set. This service uses Elastic Search 
to locate the proper data set in under 100 msecs given 
over 1 million data sets with over 120 dynamic values 
each. This service could be used to index Fast Machine 
Protection trip data, Beam Synchronous Acquisition data, 
or Detector Data from X-ray beamline experiments. 
 
 
Figure 13: Service Use By CS-Studio 
 
These are a few examples of services that have been 
developed. Other services are planned for Time Series 
Archived data, snapshot data managed as HDF5 or XML 
files, Electronic Log Book, and Data Aggregation Service 
such as hierarchical alarm views. EPICS 7 provides a way 
for facilities to develop applications that use a robust suite 
of services as illustrated in Figure 13. It also enables the 
developers to create new micro-services that can be 
shared by many applications at their facility. The EPICS 7 
Architecture provides interconnectivity between services 
and applications that allow reuse of robust services. 
 
CURRENT USE OF EPICS 7 
EPICS 7 is being released 4 th quarter of 2017. The sites 
listed here are making use of pvAccess and pvData from 
EPICS 4. These features will be seamlessly provided in 
the EPICS 7 release due out soon. ESS plans to deploy it 
for their entire facility. NSLS II, FRIB, and RAON have 
the Directory Service, Save Set Service and Data Index 
Service installed and running. The SNS experimental 
beam lines are upgrading to EPICS 7 and use the 
areaDetector service. LSLC I and LCLS II at SLAC are 
using the middle layer services for their physics 
environment. FHI has modified the Archive Appliance to 
save pvData structures. Diamond and NSLS II transmit 
areaDetector arrays between pvAccess servers and clients 
and attain 90% loading on a 10 Gbps link. As EPICS 7 
will include pvAccess in the build system, these features 
will be readily available to any facility that downloads 
release. 
FUTURE DIRECTION 
EPICS 7 enables the development of services from real-
time sources, aggregators, and static databases. A surve y 
of the large applications that are built around a distributed 
control system give insight into the potential services that 
would be useful for facilities. For physics applications: 
Matlab Middle Layer Toolkit, XAL, and SDDS all share 
one common attribute, the large configuration that assigns 
physics names to EPICS PV names. Applications for 
experiment control such as, SPEC, Malcolm, BlueSky, 
and BluIce, all include data aggregation, file 
writing/retrieval, and mapping of variable names to 
detector and trajectories. Monitoring systems such as 
Nagios and Zabbix, point to the need to have new 
applications register and report availability of services 
and resources. Relational database applications like 
IRMIS and CCDB have been developed to map device 
instances to serial numbers and run time variables. These 
data stores can be integrated through the pvAccess 
protocol and their data transmitted by pvData arbitrary 
structure support (and most applications in Normative 
Types). Small, robust, high performance services can 
transform the way applications are written into small 
lightweight applications that use services that are proven 
at multiple facilities. 
CONCLUSION 
 EPICS 7 provides mechanisms to make all data 
available as services. Data types used for generic services 
are provide as a set of normative types. These 
mechanisms and data types were used to integrate a set of 
services to integrate real time data, aggregated data, and 
configuration data. EPICS 7 is in use for physics 
applications and DAQ at multiple sites. The EPICS 7 
release makes it possible for services to be developed by 
facilities throughout the community to provide an agile 
and high-performance environment for automation, data 
acquisition and data analysis. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The EPICS 7 development has been performed by 
many dedicated engineers in the community. Among 
them are: Matej Sekoranyja (Cosylab), Marty Kraimer 
(Osprey DCS), Michael Davidsaver (Osprey DCS), Ralph 
16th Int. Conf. on Accelerator and Large Experimental Control Systems ICALEPCS2017, Barcelona, Spain JACoW Publishing
ISBN: 978-3-95450-193-9 doi:10.18429/JACoW-ICALEPCS2017-MOBPL01
Software Technology Evolution
MOBPL01
25
Content from this work may be used under the terms of the CC BY 3.0 licence ( © 2017). Any distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s), title of the work, publisher, and DOI.

 
Lange (ITER), Andrew Johnson (APS), Timo Korhonen 
(ESS), Heinz Junkes (FHI), Patrick Marschalik (FHI), 
Murali Shankar(SLAC), Bruno Martins(FRIB), Kunal 
Shroff(BNL), Arman Arkilic(BNL), Michael Dalesio 
(Osprey DCS), Anton Metzger (Independent), Greg 
White(SLAC), David Hickin (Formerly DLS), Guobao 
Shen (APS), Sinesa Veseli (APS), Bob Dalesio (Osprey 
DCS), Steve Hartman (ORNL). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Matthias Clausen, L Dalesio, "EPICS - Experimental 
Physics and Industrial Control System", International 
Committee for Future Accelerators, Beam Dynamics 
Newsletter 47, pp. 56-66. Dec. 2008  
[2] T. Korhonen, L.R. Dalesio, N. Malitsky, et al., "EPICS V4 
Progress Report", in Proceedings of ICALEPCS 2013, San 
Francisco, CA, USA, TUCOCB04 
[3] J.O. Hill, "Channel Access: A Software Bus for the 
LAACS", ICALEPCS'89, Vancouver, Canada 1989. 
[4] M.R. Clausen, et al., "Control System Studio - Integrated 
Operating, Configuration and Development", in 
Proceedings of ICALEPCS 2009, Kobe, Japan, THC002 
[5] J.D. Purcell, D.J.Armstrong, K.-U.Kasemir, et al., "CSS - 
We Didn't Invent It, We Made It Better", in Proceedings 
of ICALEPCS 2009, Kobe, Japan, TUP010 
[6] Bruno Martins, reported at the areaDetector workshop, 
connected to ICLAPECS 2017. Information at: 
http://cars9.uchicago.edu/software/epics/NDP
luginPva.html 
[7] Bruno Martins and Kunal Shroff reported at the 
areaDetector workshop, connected to ICLAPECS 2017. 
Information and links to the source code can be found at: 
http://cars.uchicago.edu/software/epics/NDPl
uginPva.html 
[8] L. Yang, J. Choi, Y. Hidaka, et al., "The Design of NSLS-
II High Level Physics Applications", in Proceedings of 
ICALEPCS 2013, San Francisco, CA, USA, TUPPC130 
16th Int. Conf. on Accelerator and Large Experimental Control Systems ICALEPCS2017, Barcelona, Spain JACoW Publishing
ISBN: 978-3-95450-193-9 doi:10.18429/JACoW-ICALEPCS2017-MOBPL01
MOBPL01
26
 Content from this work may be used under the terms of the CC BY 3.0 licence ( © 2017). Any distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s), title of the work, publisher, and DOI.
Software Technology Evolution