FIVE YEARS OF EPICS 7 – STATUS UPDATE AND ROADMAP* 
R. Lange†, ITER Organization, St. Paul lez Durance, France 
A. N. Johnson, S. Veseli, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL, USA 
K. Shroff, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY , USA 
T. Korhonen, S. Rose, European Spallation Source ERIC, Lund, Sweden 
H. Junkes, Fritz-Haber-Institute, Berlin, Germany 
S. M. Hartman, K. Kasemir, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA 
L. B. Dalesio, M. Davidsaver, G. McIntyre, Osprey DCS LLC, Ocean City, MD, USA 
G. White, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA, USA 
M. R. Kraimer‡, Self Employment, USA 
 
Abstract 
After its first release in 2017, EPICS version 7 has been 
introduced into production at several sites. 
The central feature of EPICS 7, the support of structured 
data through the new pvAccess network protocol, has been 
proven to work in large production systems. EPICS 7 facil-
itates the implementation of new functionality, including 
developing AI/ML applications in controls, managing large 
data volumes, interfacing to middle-layer services, and 
more. Other features like support for the IPv6 protocol and 
enhancements to access control have been implemented. 
Future work includes integr ating a refactored API into 
the core distribution, adding modern network security fea-
tures, as well as developing new and enhancing existing 
services that take advantage of these new capabilities. 
The talk will give an overview of the status of deploy-
ments, new additions to the EPICS Core, and an overview 
of its planned future development. 
INTRODUCTION 
EPICS 7 
The EPICS (Experimental Physics and Industrial Con-
trol System) software toolkit has been publishing regular 
updates of its major version 3 release series for more than 
30 years [1]. 
In December 2017, the 10 -year initial development 
phase of the next-generation EPICS Base culminated in a 
large, tedious merge operation. After testing and verifica-
tion, the first release of the combined existing EPICS V3 
code and the new modules (working title “EPICS V4”) was 
published as “EPICS 7” [2]. 
pvAccess 
The pvAccess (PV A) network protocol, which was intro-
duced with EPICS 7, extends the features of the classical 
EPICS protocol Channel Access (CA). PV A provides the 
ability to transport user-defined  arbitrary stru ctures with-
out the need to recompile client or server code. Its distin-
guishing advantage over similar industrial protocol stand-
ards is a highly efficient su bscription mechanism: Both 
server and client have an identical copy of the complete 
structure. When an update is  sent, only the changed ele-
ments of the structure are transferred over the network and 
updated on the target side. 
Initial Goals 
A few main goals for EPICS 7 were identified and set 
from the very beginning, as part of the “EPICS V4” devel-
opment: 
 Compatibility of the Input/Output Controller (IOC) 
software. To allow a non-intrusive and gradual update 
process for the many existing installations, the EPICS 
Process Database and all interface layers below shall 
not change. 
 Scope continuity between CA and PVA. Installations 
shall be able to run pvAccess as a full replacement for 
the classical Channel Access protocol, across all net-
works and layers. 
 Minimal configuration. Simply migrating an installa-
tion from CA to PVA shall not require complex addi-
tional configuration. 
 User-level libraries in multiple programming lan-
guages for client and server. EPICS Base shall provide 
well-documented user-level libraries to allow the cre-
ation of PVA server and client applications in C/C++, 
Java and Python. 
EVOLUTION AND ACHIEVEMENTS 
Normative Types 
Two of the major factors contributing to the success of 
EPICS have been standard record types in the Process Da-
tabase and the standard compiled-in structures of the CA 
network protocol. Based on these two concepts, generic 
EPICS applications work across many installations. 
To keep that advantage, PV A includes well-defined 
structures, called Normative Types (NT), which are a su-
perset of the CA standard structures. 
Normative Types enable the efficient creation of generic 
applications and ensure the functional compatibility be-
tween CA and PV A. While pvAccess allows arbitrary data 
 ___________________________________________  
* Work supported in part by the U.S. Department of Energy under contracts
DE-AC02-76SF00515 and DE-AC05-00OR22725. 
† ralph.lange@gmx.de 
‡ Died 31 January 2022 
19th Int. Conf. Accel. Large Exp. Phys. Control Syst. ICALEPCS2023, Cape Town, South Africa JACoW Publishing
ISBN: 978-3-95450-238-7 ISSN: 2226-0358 doi:10.18429/JACoW-ICALEPCS2023-TH1BCO01
Software
Control Frameworks for Accelerator & Experiment Control
TH1BCO01
1087
Content from this work may be used under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 licence (© 2023). Any distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s), title of the work, publisher, and DOI

structures to be transmitted,  control system components 
can only efficiently communicate if there is agreement on 
how the structure for a fundamental value of a Process Var-
iable (PV) and the associated metadata, e.g., timestamp and 
alarm status, are expressed. PV A’s Normative Types meet 
this need by defining standard structure types for scalar and 
array data types, covering numeric, enumerated and string 
data. These structures are very similar to the compiled-in 
types used by Channel Access. This equivalence allows 
straightforward mapping, which creates an easy migration 
path. 
As shown in Listing 1, a double-typed NTScalar is a 
Normative Type that combines a “double value” with a 
timestamp, alarm state and display metadata like units and 
suggested precision. It holds the same information as the 
DBR_CTRL_DOUBLE structure does for Channel Ac-
cess, with a few additions like an optional “userTag” in the 
time stamp or a “description” and “form(at)” in the display 
detail, which are not found in the DBR_CTRL_DOUBLE. 
 
As mentioned before, pvAccess handles subscriptions to 
structures very efficiently: While a CA subscription for a 
DBR_CTRL_DOUBLE data type always transmits the 
complete structure with every update, a PV A subscription 
will only transmit the parts of the NTScalar structure that 
have changed. Fields like the “description” and limits tend 
to remain constant and will thus not contribute to the net-
work traffic during PV A subscription updates. 
In addition to scalar and array types, which are similar to 
CA data types, PV A introduces new Normative Type struc-
tures, e.g., NTNDArray and NTTable, which have no CA 
equivalents. The former holds an N-dimensional array, e.g., 
a 2-dimensional image, combined with metadata to de-
scribe the image and its format. The latter holds tabular 
data where the columns may have different types. 
Normative Types are also available for other structures 
useful for scientific data. Examples include Normative 
Types for a matrix, a multichannel data source, histograms, 
etc. Details are provided in [3]. By using such Normative 
Types, clients can be configured rather than requiring spe-
cific coding. This is an extension of the long-time EPICS 
philosophy of providing a toolkit that engineers can con-
figure to meet common control system needs. 
The Normative Types specifica tion [3] is meant to be 
open and extensible, allowing the addition of more types 
for structures deemed to be generic and of general interest. 
For cases requiring data structures that cannot be encap-
sulated in a Normative Type, it is always possible to define 
a specialized structure for local use. In this case, both the 
server and the client need to  be explicitly aware of the 
structure and its semantics. General-purpose clients will 
not be able to meaningfully handle or manipulate such a 
structure beyond simple display and storage. Nonetheless, 
this option provides the PV A mechanisms for efficient data 
transport and opens a door into a PV A-based ecosystem. 
This provides great flexibility for meeting any unique 
needs for transporting scientific data. 
Integration in the IOC 
QSRV is a pvAccess server that can be built into an IOC 
to enable PV A connections to the EPICS Process Database. 
Data from records can be served over CA or PV A with es-
sentially the same content. However, the PV A normative 
type has more fields than the CA structure, including “de-
scription”, a time stamp “user” tag, an alarm “message” 
and display formatting hints. 
Individual records and their fields are automatically 
mapped to PV A PVs using suitable normative types. This 
straightforward “single” PV mapping does not require any 
specific configuration. 
In addition, there is initial support for combining data 
from different EPICS Process Database records into cus-
tom “group” PV stru ctures served by PV A. Compared to 
updates from separate PVs, the data in such a “group” PV 
can provide atomic updates. 
Integration in Existing Applications 
The general intent is to eventually transition all EPICS 
tools to the PV A protocol while supporting CA as long as 
possible. 
The CS-Studio ecosystem exemplifies how EPICS tools 
aim to transparently sup port both Channel Access and 
pvAccess. As long as PV A data uses Normative Types, CS-
Studio can switch between the protocols by changing the 
PV name prefix between “ca://” and “pva://”. While “ca://” 
is for now the default, sites can already select “pva://” as 
their local default. 
To end users, CS-Studio tools behave the same regard-
less of the underlying protocol. Data originating from rec-
ords on an IOC or other Channel Access or PV A servers is 
double value 
alarm_t alarm  
    int severity 
    int status 
    string message 
time_t timeStamp   
    long secondsPastEpoch 
    int nanoseconds 
    int userTag 
structure display 
    double limitLow 
    double limitHigh 
    string description 
    string units  
    int precision 
    enum_t form 
        int index 
        string[] choices [Dec, Hex, Exp, …] 
control_t control 
    double limitLow 
    double limitHigh 
    double minStep 
valueAlarm_t valueAlarm 
    boolean active 
    double lowAlarmLimit 
    double lowWarningLimit 
    double highWarningLimit 
    double highAlarmLimit 
    int lowAlarmSeverity 
    int lowWarningSeverity 
    int highWarningSeverity 
    int highAlarmSeverity 
    byte hysteresis 
Listing 1: Structure of double type NTScalar. 
19th Int. Conf. Accel. Large Exp. Phys. Control Syst. ICALEPCS2023, Cape Town, South Africa JACoW Publishing
ISBN: 978-3-95450-238-7 ISSN: 2226-0358 doi:10.18429/JACoW-ICALEPCS2023-TH1BCO01
TH1BCO01
Content from this work may be used under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 licence (© 2023). Any distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s), title of the work, publisher, and DOI
1088
Software
Control Frameworks for Accelerator & Experiment Control

treated in the same way as long as PV A uses Normative 
Types for scalars and arrays. 
The advantage of PV A starts to emerge for waveforms 
and images based on the “NTNDArray” data type. This 
Normative Type combines array values with metadata re-
garding compression and image encoding. In the past, such 
data had to be transferred via a collection of separate CA 
PVs. Using PV A, a single NTNDArray PV provides the 
complete information for compressed waveforms or im-
ages. Because of the standardized semantics of the Norma-
tive Type structure, this information is completely under-
stood and used by the CS-Studio image display and wave-
form plot widgets. 
New projects might be able to exclusively use PV A while 
existing projects will need to undergo a gradual transition 
from CA to PV A. For a record “X” on an EPICS 7 IOC, 
some applications will simply use “X” as a PV name, and 
the tool will then interact via either CA or PV A depending 
on the site-specific default protocol. Other applications 
will specifically use “ca://X” or “pva://X” to access the 
same data via the specified protocol. 
An archive system that is configured to sample and store 
the value of PV “X” may initially use the default CA pro-
tocol and get updated to sample and store the PV “pva://X” 
later on. The CS-Studio Data Browser, a tool to show 
trends of PV values over time, has been prepared for this 
transition. When the user views a trace for the PV 
“pva://X”, the Data Browser w ill start to show its values 
based on that fully qualified name. In addition, it queries 
the archive for potential hist ory data of PVs “ca://X” and 
“X”, assuming that data for past time periods has been sam-
pled using those names, using different protocols. Combin-
ing the results, the Data Browse r presents the user with a 
single trace for the PV that transparently bridges protocol 
changes. 
Data Acquisition 
Data Acquisition use cases require efficiency and high 
bandwidth from their network transport, combined with 
consistency between data and high accuracy time stamps 
across measurement, archive and retrieval. 
The PV A Normative Types allow for efficient transport 
of structured data “out of the box”. As mentioned above, 
the NTNDArray, in addition to the array data, includes suf-
ficient metadata to allow a PV A client to interpret and dis-
play the data. Array dimensions, data encoding, data type, 
etc. are part of a single struct ure, allowing a client to plot 
or process the data based solely on the information pro-
vided by the PV . Also, for that single structure, consistency 
at any time can be guaranteed . This enables features like 
data compression within the structure. E.g., CS-Studio sup-
ports lossless LZB compression, which can be enabled/dis-
abled at the server end, while the client dynamically adjusts 
based on the provided encoding metadata. 
PV A is used in production at multiple facilities for data 
acquisition and imaging. For example, the areaDetector 
module [4] supports the PV A transport of image data from 
a wide variety of detectors for x-ray scattering and imag-
ing. PV A is used for the transport of neutron scattering 
time-of-flight / pixel ID event arrays. PV A is used for beam 
synchronous acquisition for pulsed accelerators to ensure a 
consistent data set across the machine for beam diagnos-
tics. 
Next-Generation User-Level Libraries 
The initial pvAccess server and client implementations 
in EPICS 7 came in the form of C++ and Java libraries, 
including pvAccessCPP, pvAccessJava, pvDataCPP and 
pvDataJava. These implementations successfully demon-
strated the desired functionality and are operational in pro-
duction setups. Their design aimed for the same Applica-
tion Programming Interface (API): the C++ and Java li-
braries contained nearly the same class names, method 
names and data types as permitted by the underlying pro-
gramming environments. On the downside, these initial 
implementations were restricted to features that are com-
mon to C++ and Java, failing to take advantage of the 
strengths of each programming environment. 
In 2019, a new Java implementation (core-pva) and a 
new C++ implementation (PVXS) were started, each con-
centrating on leveraging the advantages of the correspond-
ing programming environment. For example, the original 
implementations included their own runtime type system. 
The Java implementation now uses its native type system 
and “instanceof”, while the C++ implementation makes 
full use of C++ templates to handle the various data types. 
Compared to the initial PV A implementations, the core-pva 
and PVXS APIs are quite different, but more natural to pro-
grammers who are fluent in the respective language. Fre-
quent interaction among the PVXS and core-pva imple-
menters asserts network compatibility – not only between 
the new C++ and Java implementations but also when in-
teracting with the original implementations. The PV A pro-
tocol documentation has b een reviewed and updated 
throughout the re-implementation of the protocol. 
Both PVXS and core-pva now meet the desired require-
ments. While the original implementations are in use and 
still maintained with bug fixes, the new implementations 
are clearly seen as the way forward, as demonstrated with 
support for IPV6 and security detailed below. The core-pva 
Java library is used in CS-Studio. At the time of this writ-
ing, the EPICS 7 IOC still defaults to the original C++ PV A 
libraries, but the PVXS library already offers a complete 
set of command line tools and an alternate “QSRV” inte-
gration into the IOC. The “P4P” Python binding to PVXS 
allows convenient access from Python. Finally, a PV A gate-
way based on P4P and thus PVXS allows PV A traffic 
across different networks. 
Middle-Layer Services 
EPICS 7 supports high-performance data services, as a 
consequence of pvAccess supporting complex data struc-
tures and being able to request a PV value subject to argu-
ments – implementing in effect  a Remote Procedure Call 
(RPC) access method. This RPC access method is tailored 
to request/response type operations. It differs from the 
19th Int. Conf. Accel. Large Exp. Phys. Control Syst. ICALEPCS2023, Cape Town, South Africa JACoW Publishing
ISBN: 978-3-95450-238-7 ISSN: 2226-0358 doi:10.18429/JACoW-ICALEPCS2023-TH1BCO01
Software
Control Frameworks for Accelerator & Experiment Control
TH1BCO01
1089
Content from this work may be used under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 licence (© 2023). Any distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s), title of the work, publisher, and DOI

common data access methods (read, write, subscribe) in al-
lowing the payload for request and response to be different 
and to change for each execution. 
Examples include simple PV name resolution by match-
ing query (e.g., regex), retrieval of physics lattice and beam 
models, and interfaces to relational databases like Oracle 
for operational data, such as magnet polynomial measure-
ments or device commissioning status. A complex suite of 
EPICS 7 services for FACET at SLAC interfaces modern 
Python and MATLAB physics applications to many legacy 
physics systems such as synchronous orbit acquisition, 
linac klystron energy profile control, and even operation of 
an old Fortran-based multi-modal experiment manager. 
This support was primarily included in EPICS 7 in predic-
tion of big-data siloing and high-performance computing 
off the control system network, as is now taking shape 
where ML, large numerical, and multi-particle modeling 
systems hosted in high-performance clusters interface to 
the production control system. 
In a different case of an EPICS 7 service, conceptually 
closer to control, the RPC access method is used to imple-
ment complex write operations with transactional behavior 
patterns. In ITER’s Magnetic s Diagnostics system, which 
measures magnetic field lines and plasma current, the com-
plete configuration for 74 FPGA-based controllers (5 kB 
of data each) is written as a single specialized PV A struc-
ture to the system’s master controller [5]. That controller 
implements the transactional behavior by verifying data in-
tegrity, configuring all FPGAs, verifying their health status 
and returning a single operati on return status to the PV A 
client. 
Increased Adoption and Use 
As detailed in recent Collaboration Meetings [6], the EP-
ICS Collaboration continues to grow with new projects and 
facilities adopting EPICS 7 and existing facilities choosing 
EPICS 7 for major upgrades. For example, at the Fermi 
National Accelerator Laboratory, EPICS has been selected 
as the control system framework for the PIP-II Project, the 
facility’s flagship accelerator project for high-energy phys-
ics. At Brookhaven National Laboratory, EPICS has been 
selected for the Electron-Ion Collider Project, a next-gen-
eration collider for nuclear phy sics research. In both of 
these cases, EPICS 7 will be replacing an existing in-house 
developed control system framework, although with an ex-
pectation for EPICS integration with some remaining orig-
inal control system components. 
EPICS 7 is being used by numerous other large-scale 
science facility projects including the STS project at 
ORNL, the APS-U project at ANL, the ALS-U project at 
LBNL, the LCLS-II HE and MEC-U projects at SLAC, the 
ESS facility in Sweden, and the international ITER project. 
The addition of these large projects to the collaboration en-
sures long-term support for EPICS and will help to drive 
and fund the ongoing modernization of the toolkit to meet 
the needs of new facilities. 
Small projects and university labs using EPICS add 
other benefits to the collaboration: these groups provide a 
vibrant training ground for students and the next generation 
of EPICS-aware scientists and engineers. The Fritz-Haber-
Institute, for example, is developing a community practice 
for EPICS to support small-scale experiments and smaller 
facilities across the institutes of its organizational frame-
work, the Max-Planck-Society. Numerous university la-
boratories have found the free open-source EPICS toolkit 
a cost-effective way to develop control systems, benefiting 
from the broader EPICS community. 
ESS started using PV A as the default protocol for the 
control room applications (CS-Studio/Phoebus) at the start 
of the 2023 commissioning period. The control system ran 
under heavy network load with minimal issues. A crucial 
component of the ecosystem is the P4P module’s PV A gate-
way: it delivers major performance improvements over CA 
gateways, especially in the ability to handle concurrent 
connections of mixed-sized data items, from scalars to 
multi-megabyte arrays, under high load. 
Switching to PV A proved to be worth the effort, bringing 
a number of advantages over CA, with virtually no disrup-
tions due to the migration. 
Support for the RTEMS Real-Time OS 
The RTEMS real-time OS [7] has been used as an alter-
native to VxWorks [8] for IOCs that control VMEbus sys-
tems, mostly running older EPICS 3.14 versions. Only 
very few facilities are building new systems based on 
VMEbus. EPICS 7 is used on RTEMS 4 in production in a 
few installations, but a reliable assessment of the maturity 
of that combination cannot be extrapolated from these few 
instances. In the past, progre ss in porting EPICS to the 
newer RTEMS versions 5 and 6 has been slow. 
This situation has changed drastically in the last year, 
following a change in licensing policy for the VxWorks 
system. Some large facilities (APS, Gemini, Diamond) 
need to continue to use existing VMEbus hardware and 
drivers for facilities that are undergoing major upgrades 
and want to switch the real-time OS to RTEMS. Moving 
towards a strategic partnership, some laboratories started 
working with RTEMS developers to achieve full support 
for running EPICS 7 on RTEMS 6 on common PowerPC-
based VME CPU boards, with support for the standard net-
work protocols that EPICS installations use (NFS, 
DHCP/BOOTP , NTP/PTP). Support for NFSv4 has been 
tested, and a Board Support Package for the newer 
MVME2500 (QorIQ) VME CPU board is planned for the 
end of the year. 
With full RTEMS 6 support, EPICS 7 can now be used 
on other single-board computers such as the Raspberry Pi, 
Zynq 7000 SoCs and other boards with real-time features. 
Future developments planned for RTEMS include sup-
port for remote debugging with gdb and the support for dy-
namic loading. 
Improved Documentation 
Documentation coverage and quality are persistent is-
sues in distributed collaborations and EPICS is certainly no 
exception to this. Some years ago, a new website [9] was 
launched and the development of another site for reference 
19th Int. Conf. Accel. Large Exp. Phys. Control Syst. ICALEPCS2023, Cape Town, South Africa JACoW Publishing
ISBN: 978-3-95450-238-7 ISSN: 2226-0358 doi:10.18429/JACoW-ICALEPCS2023-TH1BCO01
TH1BCO01
Content from this work may be used under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 licence (© 2023). Any distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s), title of the work, publisher, and DOI
1090
Software
Control Frameworks for Accelerator & Experiment Control

materials [10] was started. However, the contributions re-
mained few, mostly due to a lack of clear conventions and 
workflows. Managing the Content Management System of 
our main website, despite its popularity and nice front end, 
is challenging for an occasional contributor. 
To improve the situation, a recent “document-a-thon” (a 
workshop series dedicated to improving the documenta-
tion) was used to decide on a new structure for the docu-
mentation, create a contribution guide and reorganize the 
existing websites. To make contributing easier for the EP-
ICS community, central parts of the documentation sources 
are now hosted on GitHub and use the familiar GitHub con-
tribution workflow. Processing, publishing and hosting are 
provided by the readthedocs.org service. 
Not all documentation belongs in the central repository. 
Add-on modules should host their documentation with the 
source code and link to it fro m the central documentation 
hub. By using the same conventions, tools and styles, inte-
gration and common look-and-feel will improve and new 
users will experience a more efficient learning curve. 
HA VE WE MET THE GOALS? 
Five years after its initial release, EPICS 7 has achieved 
all major goals initially planned. 
 The EPICS Process Database and the underlying IOC 
software did not see intrusive changes with the intro-
duction of EPICS 7.  
Existing IOC software continues to work; the PVA 
server can be added to existing applications and runs 
in parallel to the CA server. 
 Using Normative Types, PVA clients and servers sup-
port a superset of the CA functionality. Switching from 
CA to PVA can be done gradually – client by client, 
server by server – and smoothly. 
 Straight replacement of CA by PVA needs no addi-
tional configuration on the IOC and only minimal con-
figuration changes for generic clients. 
 The second generation of user-level libraries in 
C/C++, Java and Python allows the creation of PVA 
server and client applications using modern, language-
specific and well-documented APIs. 
While the goals have generally been achieved, a few lim-
itations still exist: 
 pvData and pvAccess code requires newer C++ com-
pilers that are not available on older, previously sup-
ported targets. The IOC pa rts of EPICS 7 are fully 
available and working, but the PVA protocol cannot be 
used on these targets. 
 Links between EPICS Database Records on different 
IOCs still use the CA protocol. Migrating this func-
tionality to use PVA is in the prototyping stage, but not 
finished. 
NEXT STEPS AND FUTURE PLANS 
IP Version 6 
IPv6 is the current internet standard, but usage of the 
older IPv4 is still prevalent. In November 2020, govern-
ment-funded sites in the USA were instructed to begin tran-
sitioning to an IPv6-only network environment within a 
few years [11]. While legacy control system equipment 
may continue to operate over IPv4 on isolated networks, 
EPICS tools running on “office networks” may have to 
support IPv6 in the very near future. 
For TCP communication, the first step of converting to 
IPv6 is quite easy. Most C/ C++ network code will accept 
hostnames with both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses, once calls 
to “gethostbyname” are replaced by calls to “getaddrinfo”. 
Java and other programming languages have related net-
work support – updating the address resolution will allow 
the code to support IPv6. 
This has been demonstrated in a branch of the “ether_ip” 
driver used by EPICS IOCs to communicate with Control-
Logix PLCs [12]. Tests with network tools show that the 
driver can now communicate with  IPv6 addresses. At the 
same time, this example shows the difficulties to expect 
when updating control systems to IPv6: ControlLogix 
PLCs cannot be configured with IPv6 addresses yet. 
For pvAccess, both PVXS and core-pva support IPv6. 
The address list used by PV A clients as well as the interface 
list used by PV A servers may contain explicit IPv6 ad-
dresses or hostnames that resolve to IPv6 addresses. By de-
fault, the IPv4 implementation uses UDP broadcasts for 
name resolution. IPv6 no longer supports broadcasts, but 
IPv6 multicasts with “link local” addresses are functionally 
equivalent and thus used for PV name resolution on IPv6. 
TCP name resolution is possible with both IPv4 and IPv6. 
Support for IPv6 required no changes to the PV A proto-
col. While a few protocol messages related to name reso-
lution contain IP addresses, these messages were designed 
from the start with sufficient space to hold IPv6 addresses. 
With PVXS now supporting both IPv4 and IPv6, the 
PVXS-based PV A gateway can be used to bridge IPv4 or 
mixed control system networks to IPv6-only networks. 
Secure Network Connections 
A plan is in motion to update PVXS (C++) and core-pva 
(Java, in CS-Studio/Phoebus) to support secure network 
connections based on the industry standard Transport 
Layer Security (TLS) technology [13]. PV A clients that 
search for PV names will be able to indicate support for 
TLS authenticated and encrypted communications. PV A 
servers that support TLS will be able to accept such search 
requests and initiate the cr eation of a secure communica-
tion session. PV A servers that support secure connections 
will prefer TLS over regular unsecured connections. Server 
authentication will be accomplished by providing an X.509 
certificate and optional client authentication will be 
achieved in the same way. 
The proposed plan will use the subject of the supplied 
client certificate as the client  name in the ACF authoriza-
tion function. This can be used to control write access to 
19th Int. Conf. Accel. Large Exp. Phys. Control Syst. ICALEPCS2023, Cape Town, South Africa JACoW Publishing
ISBN: 978-3-95450-238-7 ISSN: 2226-0358 doi:10.18429/JACoW-ICALEPCS2023-TH1BCO01
Software
Control Frameworks for Accelerator & Experiment Control
TH1BCO01
1091
Content from this work may be used under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 licence (© 2023). Any distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s), title of the work, publisher, and DOI

PVs. With integration to site authentication schemes 
(LDAP, AD, Kerberos), the retrieved principal will be used 
instead, providing greater flexibility when authenticating 
interactive users. 
TLS name resolution may either individually query a list 
of PV A servers or may contact a PV A Name Server. The 
Name Server will be updated so as to not only resolve the 
name requests to PV A servers but also provide certificate 
status information to the server and allow the servers to use 
the OCSP stapling to optimize server certificate status ver-
ification in the client. 
This new PV A network security will require a new con-
figuration. The keys and certificates will need to be provi-
sioned and stored securely. Eventually, the updated pvAc-
cess protocol will provide robust authorization in an end-
to-end encrypted, fully authenticated, efficient and man-
ageable framework for control systems access. The imple-
mentation is planned to be completely backward compati-
ble, with secure and non-secure clients and servers interop-
erating seamlessly. 
Testers are encouraged to try out the code in the PVXS 
“TLS” branch and Phoebus, and give feedback. 
This work is being undertaken over 2 years primarily by 
Osprey DCS, SLAC and ORNL, with Osprey DCS and 
SLAC contributions funded by a grant from the US Depart-
ment of Energy for this activity. 
CONCLUSION 
All initial major goals have been achieved. Adoption and 
use of EPICS 7 and its newly introduced pvAccess proto-
col are picking up: new installations are using the new pro-
tocol from day one; existing installations are beginning to 
migrate their systems, following a seamless and smooth in-
tegration path that leaves no site behind. 
EPICS users are gradually discovering the extended pos-
sibilities provided by pvAccess, creating new applications 
for use cases beyond the scope of traditional EPICS sys-
tems. 
Current projects adding support for IPv6 and Secure Net-
work Connections will cover upcoming IT issues and re-
quirements. An open and extendable system of standard 
structure types ensures compatibility and portability of ap-
plications across installations and users. 
After 30 years, EPICS remains the premier open-source 
toolkit for building control systems for accelerators and 
large experimental physics projects. With the successful re-
lease of EPICS 7, the Collaboration has provided a mod-
ernized implementation to ensure leadership for the com-
ing decades. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to acknowledge the large and 
lasting impact that Marty Kraimer has made to the EPICS 
project and collaboration from their inception and for as 
long as he was physically capable. Marty passed away on 
31 January 2022. 
REFERENCES 
[1] List of EPICS Base releases,  
https://epics.anl.gov/download/base/ 
[2] EPICS 7 release announcement,  
https://epics.anl.gov 
/tech-talk/2017/msg01977.php 
[3] Normative Types Specification,  
https://docs.epics-controls.org 
/en/latest/pv-access 
/Normative-Types-Specification.html
 
[4] EPICS Support for Multidimensional Detectors,  
https://areadetector.github.io/ 
[5] A. C. Neto et al., “Conceptual architecture of the plant sys-
tem controller for the magnetics diagnostic of the ITER to-
kamak”, Fusion Eng. Des., vol. 96-97, pp. 887-890, 2015.  
doi:10.1016/j.fusengdes.2015.06.063 
[6] EPICS Collaboration Meetings,  
https://epics-controls.org 
/news-and-events/meetings/ 
[7] RTEMS Real Time Operating System,  
https://www.rtems.org/ 
[8] VxWorks Real-Time Operating System,  
https://www.windriver.com/products/vxworks 
[9] EPICS Website,  
https://epics-controls.org/ 
[10] EPICS Documentation Website,  
https://docs.epics-controls.org/ 
[11] “Completing the Transition to Internet Protocol V ersion 6”, 
Memorandum M-21-07, Executive Office of the President, 
Office of Management and Budget, Washington (D.C.), 
Nov. 19, 2020. 
[12] K. U. Kasemir and L. R. Da lesio, “Interfacing the Control-
Logix PLC Over EtherNet/IP”, in Proc. ICALEPCS'01, San 
Jose, CA, USA, Nov. 2001, paper THDT002,  pp.. 481-483. 
https://github.com/epics-modules/ether_ip 
[13] G. White, M. Davidsaver and G. McIntyre, “Accelerator 
Systems Cyber Security Activities at SLAC”, presented at 
the 19th Biennial International Conference on Accelerator 
and Large Experimental Phys ics Control Systems, Cape 
Town, South Africa, Oct. 2023, paper TU2BCO04, this con-
ference. 
19th Int. Conf. Accel. Large Exp. Phys. Control Syst. ICALEPCS2023, Cape Town, South Africa JACoW Publishing
ISBN: 978-3-95450-238-7 ISSN: 2226-0358 doi:10.18429/JACoW-ICALEPCS2023-TH1BCO01
TH1BCO01
Content from this work may be used under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 licence (© 2023). Any distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s), title of the work, publisher, and DOI
1092
Software
Control Frameworks for Accelerator & Experiment Control